I want to do a really brief video you've
probably never had conversations like
this with white people by the way I
identify as a white person some people
consider me non-white because I'm Jewish
defense the South of France I was
considered non-white but in New York
City I'd be considered white anyway I've
had a lot of conversations white people
about First Nations languages because I
formerly was a student learning Korean
achieve way and basically all my life
I've cared a lot about First Nations
politics versus First Nations languages
by which I mean Cree a jib Wade na Soto
mohawk etc etc the native peoples of
Canada not everyone knows that term
First Nations when you talk to white
people about it some of them get
defensive and some of them say this in a
detached way you you hear their excuses
for why they personally have never
studied an indigenous language I've
never studied one of these languages why
they would never study them why they're
not teaching their kids these languages
and sometimes it's stated in terms of
why they don't think these languages
should be taught in schools why they
basically think nobody should say these
languages I mean they will never stayed
at that bluntly but it's often stated in
terms of why they wouldn't do it and why
others wouldn't couldn't shouldn't do it
and I mean that's interesting and like
that is already interesting people
should examine what their motivations
are for having those conversations with
me if I told people I was studying
ancient Greek I don't think I'd get a
similar reaction like yeah well this is
why I'd never study ancient Greek you
know obviously they emotionally feel
there's something they have to explain
to themselves like they were born and
raised in Canada they lived their whole
lives in Canada and you see and feel
this shadow of genocide on you
this shadow of the colonial history of
why Canada is the way it is why Toronto
is called Toronto why Ottawa is called
Ottawa you know these are native place
names on the map
why Saskatchewan is call Saskatchewan
you know it right to some extent you
know it's there and yet you never even
read it Wikipedia article on it most of
the time talking to people have never
done like Wikipedia level reading about
who are the Cree who are they Ghibli
they've really lived in self-selected
ignorance and I think that's why they
react that way no sir I've studied a lot
of languages and at one point I was
actually studying modern Greek not
ancient Greek but they're very similar
monetary change so I told ya learning
break you know and I got those reactions
that obviously for several years I was
studying Cambodian in several different
circumstances nobody ever had this
reaction like oh well I don't know I
wouldn't support Cambodian being taught
in the schools or like I never study and
myself like you know there there was no
no sense of that but even for YP of
course I talked about this with with
First Nations people too and their
reactions are really meaningful and
interesting that'd be a separate video
but this obviously serves something in
the white Canadian ego and you know in a
sense it should Canada should be in a
position to be proud of its indigenous
languages and proud of its indigenous
heritage instead of being ashamed of it
like in a really simple sense you know I
remember the last time I was in Ottawa
the last two times they had this
fabulous exhibition on of Inuit statuary
Inuit stone sculptures fabulous and I
remember looking at it and you know
there really is the sense of like well
this is the great Canadian art this
really represents Canada now it's not
only the Inuit we also have a lot of
really good west coast BC indigenous
Carver's if you go to have you been to
Vancouver Airport think okay okay
Vancouver Airport has gorgeous like
large-scale statues and art by First
Nations people there is this sense in
which Canada even the name Canada as a
First Nations word in case you haven't
guessed Canada isn't uh isn't a small
town in England or something you know
it's not like New York it's not new
Canada this is the this is the first
Canada it's the only one it's not it's
not like New York it's not like New
England this is old Canada this is the
original candidate the only one we got
there is this ineluctable sense in which
First Nations statuary whether it's west
coast or Inuit or something represents
Canada and
that's never gonna change no matter how
badly we manage to this up no
matter how close we come to hell right
genocide or the disappearance these
languages
it always has that it always has that
gravitas it always has that significance
in Canada always will and a lot of white
people feel we ought to be able to be
proud of this but instead we don't feel
pride it's not part of a positive pan
Canadian nationalism instead it's this
subject of shame and excuse making and
awkward rationalizations across the
political spectrum left wing right wing
moderate image whatever you know I find
this so in terms of the actual excuses
people give me for four of these
languages it's interesting the number
one excuse and I think this is actually
imitating Australians because
Australians will tell you this about
native Australia this is I think they're
taught this in school this is like the
standard excuse in Australia is well
there are so many native languages like
we can't possibly learn them all rappy
guess like well you know there are so
many Asian languages you can't look
white learn Cambodia when there are
hundreds of others you don't even within
Cambodia there are several language
within laos we have like more than 40
languages you know than Southeast Asia
we have a lot of languages so you know
therefore what would be the significance
of learning any one language now that is
very obviously a rationalization it's
very obviously nonsensical like well the
fact that I can't learn in you it also
makes it meaningless for me to learn
Cree right so with those people again I
really find they just need to read
Wikipedia they often have the the the
misconception that somehow each of these
languages is very very localized that it
can't like like you'd learn a language
and would only be valid in one village
or something and I just say to them well
you know can you look at this Wikipedia
article can you actually see the map of
how much land Cree covers as a language
and yes you can get into specific
dialects within Cree but believe me if
you speak West Cree you can learn East
but their dialects of the same language
they are fundamentally the same language
I mean it can be hard even within
England if you meet someone who really
speaks British English with a well
accent when you know and then you go to
southeast London like you know there are
there are dialect differences within the
United Kingdom within England you know
but um you know but still it's it's one
language you know and still you mean you
know whether you're looking at the
contrast between swampy Kree and rocky
Kree or even you know within a jib way
Soto and og Kree yes there are
differences but these are extra
languages that now cover a huge amount
of territory and this centralization and
rationalization of those languages has
already happened we already have a
modern standard form of written Cree
modern standard written a jib way that
process is over so a lot of people
offering this critique or excuse they're
assuming that's something that happened
hasn't happened yet like that the first
issues languages aren't ready for the
word processor and for the computer so
no actually all that happened a long
time ago for a bunch of different
reasons but including the Christian
missionaries because there were
Christian missionaries who were really
motivated to get the Bible written in a
standard Cree standard a jib way what
have you and you know yes there is more
than one standard but again if you
actually I mean you know there's more
than one standard for German like yes
there's Swiss German and there's
Austrian German and there's northern
German like so what does that make it
harder to learn any one form of German
no is it really that hard to understand
Swiss German if your background is in
Austrian German no so so it's an excuse
making mentality and all those people I
just find they're kind of one Wikipedia
article away from dropping that or just
looking at that map and realizing oh wow
Cree is a unique opportunity for a
really like pan-canadian First Nations
language that's powerful and you so what
have you a jib way the opportunity is a
little bit different because it's really
it's more in the United States than it
is in Canada we have a lot of a jib way
in Canada don't get me wrong but if you
look at how they're distributed you know
a lot of the Egypt will - south of the
Great Lakes and thus is now in the
United States but a jib way is also a
great opportunity and again it's already
been standardized there already are
dictionaries and one spelling system
what have you covering a huge area so
this isn't a case of a lane
it's only that's only seven one village
so you know what's most interesting to
me here are obviously are not the
excuses but the underlying motivations
for those excuses why is it that nobody
in Ottawa speaks the Ottawa language why
is it there are no street signs and if
you've ever been to Ottawa they put in
these enormous efforts to have French
everywhere to make everything bilingual
to make sure this French in English you
know but there's no effort to make the
Ottawa language you don't written
anywhere now Ottawa is is very similar
to to Cree otherwise in the Algonquian
language family those are all very very
similar languages Cree at Jeb way ottawa
there are there others and the Ottawa
language specifically it seems
completely inevitable that it's gonna go
extinct you know so probably the
opportunity in the future will be either
to have a jib way or creed written in
you know in the City of Ottawa and not
specifically the Ottawa language and
that's very sad but again you know New
York New York was the homeland of the
one app a lanata was a very important
language same language family Algonquin
language and the opportunity to preserve
Lana pay as a language is now already
gone that's already extinct I've seen
estimates that there were like 20 people
who can still speak Ottawa but some of
them say and that's a few years at a
date it's probably the last five people
or something on this one reservations in
the u.s. there are maybe a couple people
who can still really speak Ottawa but
Ottawa is probably is really facing
extinction and the opportunities there
to promote and promulgate and expand
create a Jeb way you know now this is
happening tragically in the context of
genocide and colonialism however it is
also true that you know for example
within the history of Europe you did
have the emergence of you know standard
German from a plurality of German
dialects you have the emergence of
standard English from a plurality of
English dialects and you know the
specific story of Boswell and Johnson
and the writing of the first popular
dictionaries in English and in many
centuries later the emergence of radio
and television there's a lot to that
story of how did stand
English emerge yes it is ultimately
tragic that standard Korean a cheap way
have emerged in the way that they have
but now in 2017
they have emerged and this we could say
something similar about Mohawk
specifically and the question is do we
take the next step or do we keep making
excuses and lying to ourselves about our
own insecurities as what Canadians until
these languages go extinct look bring us
back to you know I like to keep it real
you know I like to keep it all the way
real girlfriends having a little coffee
it's okay you know I see a logo so we
know a white Canadian who put her
daughter's into a Chinese language
school Canada so why is this obviously
there are white Canadians who are proud
to have their white kids grow up
speaking Chinese the Chinese language
has some kind of prestige for them by
the way I speak Chinese I'm living in
China right now as I make this video you
may not know this if you're watching
this video for some other reason so I'm
not prejudiced against the Chinese as a
people or Chinese as the language okay
there are other people obviously who put
their kids into Jewish schools where
they grow up speaking Hebrew what is
this big cultural emphasis on learning
Hebrew as a prestige language right and
you know there are some Christians who
do that also because they feel Hebrew is
the the basis of the Christian tradition
but obviously more common with Judaism
right by the way ethnically I'm I'm half
Jewish so obviously I'm not saying this
out of anti-semitism okay but the
question has to be asked will there ever
be a time when white Canadians are proud
to have their kids grow up speaking
Ojibwe Mohawk Cree den a inuit inducted
to it you name it
are we moving towards that or not
is there gonna be one school in downtown
Ottawa that instead of being the English
Chinese bilingual school or the English
French bilingual school really is the
English Creole English ative way
bilingual school and where it's not
something people are ashamed of in that
second rate or is that is is a
concession because of a reconciliation
process where it's a prestige school
people say yes I'm Canadian I'm part of
the history of Canada I'm part of the
political future of Canada and therefore
I'm putting in the time and effort and
money to make sure my kid grows up with
some level of language ability in Korea
Ojibwe that means something more than
raising my kids speaking French by the
way my own daughter speaks French
fluently half a lot of my family
relatives speak French blah blah blah
French is also part of my family it's
it's not that I am anti French but I am
like sorry I've lived in France I might
be needed but living in France would be
another video but yeah oh you know
French has this status of a prestige
language Chinese does etc etc we need to
really rien for the future and we have
to recognize Canada is never gonna be
New England Canada is never gonna be New
France this is something of really
fundamental importance and it's a
positive opportunity for a future either
we take advantage of it now or never
well the bike